# Cryptocurrency-Price-Predictions
Machine Learning Cryptocurrency Price Prediction Final Project

## Abstract

In this study, historical prices of five cryptocurrencies were examined in order to predict future average prices of the tokens. The aim of this paper is to predict future prices of cryptocurrencies with the intention that new investors will be more willing to invest in this market. Regression and time-series models are closely looked at when predicting future average closing prices. These models include Decision Tree regression, Linear Regression, Bayesian Ridge regression, and an ARIMA model. The model that was most consistent with the data was the Bayesian Ridge regression model, having the highest performance numerically. The results of the prediction charts ensure that new investors need not worry about the fluctuation of closing prices, as each of the cryptocurrencies self-regulate.

## Cryptocurrency Price Predictions

The introduction of blockchain technology as a means to validate transactions on a network without a 3rd party has caused the decentralized finance industry to boom garnering cryptocurrencies massive amounts of attention. Cryptocurrency is a digital token/currency that is secured by cryptography and is used to ensure integrity on a network as well as a medium of exchange within a peer-to-peer (P2P) digital economic system. It is widely known that cryptocurrency is an incredibly volatile form of currency that differs from traditional centralized banking systems. Unfortunately, these unpredictable qualities seem to deter lots of individuals from engaging with this new global financial system putting them at an economic disadvantage. We wish to detect and explore the patterns within the realm of decentralized finance to get a better understanding of the industry as a whole and to help individuals with fear of cryptocurrency take advantage of their ever-increasing value.

## Literature Review

As the popularity of Bitcoin rises, studies have shown price predictions of the cryptocurrency using historical data. One study used an ARIMA model that viewed the accuracy of Bitcoin prices compared to the results of prices in a Long Short term memory (LSTM) network (Hua, 2020). The ARIMA model was used in order to create a precise and efficient time-series model with the data. The average price per one minute resulted in two graphs that explain the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation of the data. This information leads to two forecasting models that show a decrease of accuracy of the model over a longer period of time. The runtime of the ARIMA function is exponentially less than that of the LSTM network, yet ARIMA does not stay as consistent in its calculations over a longer time period.

## Research Questions or Hypothesis

For many people who are starting their cryptocurrency journey, volatile qualities of crypto are unappealing to newcomers. In this study, the historical data of various cryptocurrencies is explored in order to make new users less apprehensive in investing. This reasoning will encourage more people to invest in the world of cryptocurrency, which would have a positive impact on the individuals as well as current crypto holders. This is because when more people invest, the demand rises. In order to take advantage of this cycle, historical data must be used when creating prediction models. Historical data shows information on a large scale, which may predict possible upcoming trends in cryptocurrencies.
**Hypothesis 1: Historical data will allow us to predict future prices of tokens. 
**Hypothesis 2: Cryptocurrency price predictions can be used to make new people more confident in investing.

## Methodology

This research was conducted by using the dataset Cryptocurrency Historical Prices from Kaggle (Rajkumar, 2013). The information in this data set is taken from CoinMarketCap API, which is a widely known price-tracking website in the cryptocurrency space. We have selected the top 5 volatile cryptocurrencies (excluding stable coins) to pull historical data from: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Binance Coin, XRP, Solana. Bitcoin and XRP represent digital currencies, Ethereum and Solana are infrastructure cryptocurrencies, and Binannace Coin is an exchange.


###### Method 1
We utilized various regression models for price prediction. The models used were Decision Tree Regression, Linear Regression, and Bayesian Regression. For each of the five tokens, all three regression models were used. In this case, regression models proved useful as it was intended to have a numeric output that could be used to compare model results. For each regression model, there were three attributes that were used to test if the model was correctly fitted to the data. These values include R-Squared, Mean Square Error, and Root Mean Square Error. The R-Squared value is a statistical measure with a value of 0 to 1. It represents the proportion of variance for dependent and independent variables. This value can explain if the independent variable can explain the dependent variable. The closer this value is to 1, the better the model fits our data. Next, the mean square error value represents the average of the squares of the errors. This is calculated by taking the squared sum of all observed values minus the predicted values. The lower this value is, the better. The RMSE is another measure of accuracy in statistics. The RMSE takes the square root of the mean squared error value. Similar to the MSE, the lower the value, the better for our results. In order to accurately compare the findings in each model, the data needed to be fitted and scaled. This is due to the fact that there exist major fluctuations in each dataset which represent high and low closing prices. The data was scaled in order for the extreme values to be counted in the model and not be considered outliers. The average closing price values needed to be uniformly scaled ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 in order to accurately compare the closing prices and attributed values of each token to that of the others.

###### Method 2
We created a time series model for price prediction in order to make new crypto investors more confident in the digital market. In this study, an ARIMA model is researched and incorporated, which is used when tracking changes over a certain time period that has a changing average value. Analyzing PMDArima, which is a pyramid-ARIMA time series model, proved useful to the dataset. The two time series models were useful when tracking fluctuations in prices, as the models are typically used when tracking stock prices. For the ARIMA models, we used the three numeric attributes that were used for the regression models. The R-Squared, Mean Square Error, and Root Mean Square Error were used again to determine if the ARIMA model fit the data for each token. These values were additionally fitted to the time-series models in order to make the data stationary.

## Data Preparation
After inputting the five datasets from Kaggle, it is necessary to preprocess the data. Each token is inputted as its own dataset in order to efficiently perform regression analysis on the individual historical data. Data with missing values are cleansed from the set, making the information more uniform.

A migrated dataset was created by adding three new columns to the original dataset. The month, day, and year of each data point that was collected was used to calculate average values of the closing price for each of the five tokens. In this case, the following closing prices were examined: three days before the date, one week before the date, and one month before the date. The purpose of this migrated dataset was to ensure that the results of the data were looked at in an efficient way. Comparing the average closing price between three days versus one month shows that the cryptocurrencies may undergo drastic changes, which is a possible concern that was previously mentioned with people unfamiliar with crypto. Creating these additional columns allowed for a more in depth understanding of the various fluctuations in cryptocurrency when observing the data in a time series model.

## Regression Analysis
The regression model results were evaluated across the five datasets, each having a corresponding Decision Tree regression, linear regression, and Bayesian Ridge regression. For every token excluding Bitcoin, the data was modeled best by a Bayesian Ridge regression. The Bitcoin dataset performed best with a linear regression model. The results of each regression model were plotted with the predicted and true values of the model. All five graphs show very strong positive correlations, assuring that the metrics of the data fit well in these models. The testing and training models show close values in the charts, as each plotted point is close to the others. In the Bitcoin graph, the correlation was the strongest. The least number of outliers were present and the predicted values were uniformly plotted against the true values. The most outlier points appeared on the Solana graph, which was not a cause for concern. This could be attributed to the fact that this was the smallest and newest dataset used in this study, therefore there were less data points for the model to use. Minor fluctuations in price affected this dataset the greatest as the data had only been collected for about a year, but overall, the Solana regression model performed well.
The three metrics that were examined within the regression models were R-Squared, Mean Square Error, and Root Mean Square Error. Almost all of the R-Squared values are close to 1. This is a great sign for the data, as it explains that the data is not due to random chance and fits these models extremely well. As seen with the XRP crypto, it had a high R-squared value at 0.978959 and low MSE and RMSE values, at 0.051925 and 0.227871 respectively (Table 1). Although XRP had the lowest R-Squared value of the five tokens, the overall performance of this token fit best with the model. Taking into consideration each of the three attributes allowed for this conclusion to be made. For the Bitcoin dataset, a linear regression model and attributes best fit the data. The R-Squared value of this model was the closest value to 1, at 0.996888. The high R-Squared value can explain why the Bitcoin model was the most linear token when plotted. The MSE value of Bitcoin was 610.348772 and the RMSE was 24.705238 (Table 1). It is necessary to note that for each of the three models, the MSE value of Bitcoin was much higher than any MSE of the other tokens. This was due to the fact that the scale of Bitcoin values was much higher than the scale of other tokens. In this case, a higher value was expected with the higher scale for this token, ensuring that the high MSE was consistent with the data. Overall, there was great stability in the performance of all the data with three regression models.

## Time Series Analysis
The time-series ARIMA model allowed the average closing price of the cryptocurrencies to be examined over the period of time the data was captured. Out of the five tokens, the cryptocurrency that performed the best with the time-series model was Ethereum. The R-Squared value of Ethereum was the highest, at 0.89351, and the MSE and RMSE represented the lowest values, as the MSE was 0.070933 and RMSE was 0.266333 (Table 2). This R-Squared value is reassuring to the time-series model, as the data needed to be fitted. The low MSE and RMSE values ensured that this model was a good fit for the data. For the graphical representation of Ethereum, the prediction line was consistent with the testing and training lines. This line did not have much fluctuation from the given prices, which assured that the prediction values were representative of the true values.
The prediction line for Binance Coin had the lowest performance level out of the five tokens. The prediction values strayed from the true values in the chart. The low performance could be attributed to the dataset undergoing major price fluctuations during the most recent price captures. In the first half of closing prices in 2021, the data shows extreme values for the training set. As this was the most recent period of time collected for the model, the prediction line did not have enough information to fully predict if the prices were going to continue to waver.

##Result Discussion
Overall, the five tokens were fitted well with each model used in this paper. Using regression models to assess the data in order to make new people more confident in investing in cryptocurrency allowed for the element of uncertainty to be diminished in this case. The time-series model allowed the historical data to predict the future prices of cryptocurrency. Prediction lines proved useful on graphs that captured the moving average values. The positive and strongly correlated results were further explained by the discussion of numeric attribute values. The results of the prediction charts ensure that new investors need not worry about the fluctuation of closing prices, as the cryptocurrencies are able to regulate after extreme trends.

As seen in the 2020 article, Hua examined the prices of Bitcoin through an ARIMA model and LSTM network. The ARIMA model was seen to result in a more efficient time-series model in terms of runtime, yet it did not have as great of accuracy as the LSTM model. In this paper, the ARIMA model was proven to be a time efficient model. There were a few limitations as to what this model was able to produce with data that was collected over a short period of time and that was constantly fluctuating in price. This could be due to the unusual nature of some cryptocurrencies that experience a sharp incline of investment. This instance is not a fault of the model, but should be examined when reporting historical data. The findings in this paper reiterate the findings from Hua, as the ARIMA model is useful to get an idea of price prediction, but is not entirely accurate in all predictions.
Both the regression models and the ARIMA model used historical data to predict future prices of the five cryptocurrencies. The variables R-Squared, MSE, and RMSE were calculated and examined for each model. Since the data was scaled evenly and fitted to each model, the results between all the models can be compared. The R-Squared values of the regression models was much higher than that of the ARIMA model. The highest value for the ARIMA model was from Ethereum, at 0.89351. Though this value is a good sign for the model, it was much lower than the R-Squared for regression models using the same data. The regression models seemed to work better than the ARIMA model did with this data. As discussed, the time-series model did have some disadvantages, but was overall useful to see how future prices of the datasets could be predicted with a moving average. Both models were able to allow possible new investors to be confident in their investment, as the predictions of each model were consistent with the historical data.
The limitations in this study include the number of datasets that were examined. For this paper, five datasets were tested and run with regression and time-series models. If this study were to be run again, choosing one of the cryptocurrencies to look into may be a more efficient idea. Choosing, for example, Bitcoin to be the sole dataset that is examined may allow the study to go more in depth into this coin. Here, any trends that may have affected Bitcoins closing price, such as a Bitcoin trending on social media–thus making more people invest money, may be looked at in a closer way. Focusing on multiple currencies in this paper was useful to compare the performance of all datasets, yet centering the study around one crypto may prove useful in future works.



## References
Hua, Y. (2020). Bitcoin price prediction using ARIMA and LSTM. E3S Web of Conferences.
Rajkumar, S. (2013, March). Cryptocurrency Historical Prices. Retrieved May 4, 2022 from
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sudalairajkumar/cryptocurrencypricehistory/met adata.
10
